all right James D Eugenio is the
publisher and editor of Kennedy's and
king.com he just published a review in
consortium news.com that's Robert
Perry's website called the post and the
Pentagon Papers a review of the new film
the post before we start this is
published in consortium news do you want
to say a couple words about the passing
of Robert Perry
y-yes I would I am it's a real loss for
journalism it's a real loss for people
who are interested in alternative you
know sources of information and I think
it's a real loss whether we know it or
not for this country because in my
opinion Robert Perry was the finest
journalist in America for about the last
20 years and there really I mean there's
other people who have bigger names like
Bob Woodward you know and Seymour Hersh
you know there's other people who have
much wider circulation like Michael
Isikoff but there was no one in my
opinion who could match what Bob Perry
did in about the last 20 years and by
the way I should say before that because
if you take a look at the stories he
broke when he was working in the
mainstream press I mean it's it's really
a very impressive list going all the way
back to Reagan's illegal war in Central
America to his discovery of drug running
by the CIA he was the first guy to write
about that with his partner Brian Barger
he really went after the iran-contra
scandal and he was the best journalist I
believe on the up to
surprise and he was the first guy to
link iran-contra with the election of
you know tracing the arms shipments back
to the whole October Surprise thing
showing that although that they'd went
under separate names they were actually
connected Bob he worked for three
mainstream organizations he worked for
The Associated Press he worked for
Newsweek he worked for Bloomberg News
and that all told was a fill at a period
of ten or twelve years all right and he
did amazing work then he just decided
that American journalism had become so
polarized have been so much in thrall to
the neocon movement that had taken over
both Washington and the media that you
just couldn't do honest work anymore so
that's when he decided to go out on his
own and started first a paper magazine
called consortium news and then he
turned that into a online magazine and
he was probably he started this he
catching his retirement fun alright and
I think he started in 95 and at the time
of his death which was just a few days
ago you know he was still going strong
he published it for about 20 to 23 years
he did not take advertising none at all
he survived on his fund drives all right
the people who appreciated his kind of
journalism and there were quite a few
people and I owe a lot to Bob because he
published my first movie review back in
2011 when I did the review of Clint
Eastwood's j.edgar dad had been turned
down by salon
so Lisa Pisa wants you to try Bob Perry
so I sent him the article and before I
knew it was up you know was up on his
site you know and so since then I've
done I did several articles well not
several more like 20 or 30 you know most
of them film reviews but also book
reviews you know and my latest one I
guess that's the best way to segue into
my review of the post and the Pentagon
Papers and by the way I have to say the
last time I talked to Bob was I think
the day after Christmas not knowing that
he had the first of his series of
strokes on Christmas Eve it ended up
that he he died of pancreatic cancer you
know even though he had regular checkups
I guess they couldn't detect it now I
really really hope I think his son and
calcia are gonna try and make it a go
they're gonna try and keep it going so I
really hope everybody who's listening to
this please go over there and if you
like it and I don't see how anybody's
listening to this couldn't like it go
ahead and contribute whatever you can
alright and and become you know part of
that group because there isn't anything
like it in my opinion none of these
other you know the great promise of
online journalism was pretty much
stillborn all right I believe there was
a big flurry of this stuff you know what
things like the Huffington Post
you know and Talking Points Memo
you know would be another one
daily coasts and things like that and in
my opinion none of them ever fulfilled
you know what we hope they would all
right
none of them and which of course you
know I've said in other forums the
paradigm the high point of American
journalism since world war two I believe
at least mass journalism was ramparts
magazine and the LA Free Press and none
of that none of those things that I
mentioned ever came close to it you know
bob was the only person who came close
to it because for him there was no taboo
there was nothing sacred he's one of the
very very few sites that let writers
like myself and Ray McGovern you know
talk about the the Warren Commission and
the assassination of President Kennedy
without assuming the Warren Commission
was correct you know I can't think of
any other site you know except maybe
op-ed news that's about it
but op-ed news is really more of a blog
it's not it doesn't do magazine stories
you know but Bob the and by the way Bob
let me write some very hard-hitting and
long articles the only time he ever
caught me was when I went on too long he
thought you know most people online
editors say that you know the readers
don't like reading really really really
long essays okay so he cut me once for
length that was it all right and you
know and Bob will let you do that you
know so it's it's a really great loss I
mean myself Leno sanik over a black op
radio you know I think it's me and Lisa
peace or talking about Bob's death you
know and then Oliver Stone on his
Facebook page and I'm very surprised
that his death was noted by the new
Times and The Washington Post you know
but it's a very severe loss to the
United States I I just hope the
consortium news survives I really do
concerning how good he was what a great
person he was
he let me write this ten page review of
this newest Steven Spielberg Tom Hanks
production called the post which is
supposed to be based on the Pentagon
Papers case but it's really not and when
I heard it was coming down the pike I
called up Daniel Ellsberg and I asked
them I said is this gonna be based upon
you and he said no Jim it's not based
upon me okay what's it based upon and he
said is based upon Katharine Graham hmm
I said what and he goes yeah I said are
you a consultant and he said not really
I said you mean they didn't put you
under contract said no did they talk to
you at all he said one guy called me
once I'm sorry to laugh but I if you
know anything about the Pentagon Papers
case and you're making the movie about
it and you talked to Daniel Ellsberg
once and you don't even put him under
contract to consult on the film
I mean how serious is a film are you
making because the whole point is that
the Pentagon Papers that case went on
for almost three years okay
from late 1970 okay
to not to the summer of 1973 it went on
all right and when you talk about the
Pentagon Papers it's such a wide expanse
of material of locations of personages
that there's really three things you're
talking to
when it's on goods but most people don't
know this because most people haven't
read there's about 12 or 13 good books
on the subject and I read most of them
for that review alright but first of all
there's the Pentagon Papers themselves
this was a secret study commissioned by
Bob McNamara the Secretary of Defense in
the summer of 1967 he by this time was
having severe doubts about Johnson's
conduct of the war President Johnson's
conduct of the war and if you recall by
this time Johnson's policies had
completely overthrown what Kennedy's
policies were alright because Johnson
had done something that Kennedy was
never going to do which was commit large
amounts of combat troops in the theater
in South Vietnam I think by this time
they were probably at least 450,000
combat troops there it was gonna peak
out in the spring of 1968 that's five
hundred and forty thousand combat troops
all right now there's a lot of reports
about Johnson's the conflict that was
beginning between Johnson and McNamara
at this time when McNamara commissioned
the Pentagon Papers one of the reasons
he labeled them top-secret was that he
didn't want Johnson to find out about
them because he knew that they would get
terminated all right and so the chain of
command on the Pentagon Papers was from
his deputy John McNaughton to
McNaughton's assistant Morton Halperin
and then Morton Halperin assigned
as a research analyst to conduct a
day-to-day operations of putting
together this in encyclopedic study it
it came out that it's really a total of
49 volumes
most people including myself thought it
was 47 but there's actually two more
volumes that were found all right so
it's a foot and it's really about seven
thousand in this entirety it's about
seven thousand five hundred pages and
it's a combination the way it's
constructed is that it's a combination
of narrative telling the story of
American involvement going back to 1945
started with documents throughout
proving the facts and a narrative I
think a good estimate would be that it's
about 4200 pages of narrative with about
3,300 pages of documents mmm all right
proving the story itself now this went
on for 18 months and I think one number
I saw is that Gallup eventually employed
91 researchers to write the Pentagon
Papers and one of them was Ellsberg all
right so that's one of the ways that
Ellsberg knew about it all right if
you've ever read the Pentagon Papers and
I strongly recommend you read at least a
summary of them there's a good summary
that just came out which is the New York
Times what they printed which was I
think five days of stories three days
before they were sued two days after
they were sued but it still comes about
700 pages because at times their
articles were very long as opposed to
Washington Post articles which are about
1/3 the length of the New York Times
articles all right and that's a good
summary of them all right there you can
also buy a CD
which has all 49 volumes of them but the
point of the pentagon papers and what
was so shocking about them is that
through these top-secret documents they
proved what many people especially the
leftist intellectuals suspected that the
American people were being lied to about
this war from the beginning you know
there's one absolutely sensational
document in which McNaughton in 1966
tries to justify Johnson's escalation of
the war and he says it's 10 percent to
help Vietnam it's 20 percent to avoid
Chinese expansionism it's 70 percent to
avoid a humiliating defeat in other
words the reason we were unleashing
Rolling Thunder the greatest bombing
campaign in the history of mankind was
so that Johnson did not leave would not
lose the war and by the way that was
Nixon's reason to when he took over he
actually said that the Bob Haldeman I
will not be the first American president
to lose a war so in other words all
these people you're talking literally
millions of people you know had to
perish because Johnson and Nixon didn't
want to be the first presidents to lose
a war
well of course if the American public
would have known that you know they
probably would have impeached him you
know but this was one of the secrets and
another one was it was the first time
and the Pentagon Papers where the real
question ability of the Tonkin Gulf
incident was exposed alright that of
course I think everybody listening this
will understand the Tonkin Gulf incident
occurred
the late summer of 1964 August there
were it took place over three nights by
the third night there were two American
destroyers involved two Turner join the
Maddox
and they accompanied these South
Vietnamese speed boats that would
perform attacks on the North Vietnamese
Coast when the talking Gulf incident
first came to light Johnson said that
number one the American ships were in
international waters number two they
were routine patrols and number three
they had no association with the South
Vietnamese speed boats in other words it
was all an accident it later turned out
of course with the help of the Pentagon
Papers that we found out that all three
of those were to be polite wrong to be
more brutally honest lies all right okay
because number one they were not routine
patrols they were going up and down the
coast of North Vietnam because those
destroyers had special electronic
equipment that we're trying to find
radar stations and targets they were in
conjunction with the patrol boats who
would then attack them and find out more
information about things like radar and
some of the time they were not in
international waters they went actually
in and out it later turned out that and
I think this is on the Pentagon Papers
both McGeorge Bundy and George ball
admitted that they were provocations now
John's
said that there were two attacks on the
American destroyers well that was false
to the second attack did not happen all
right
and the first attack consisted of one
bullet through one hole okay
now what kind of a president goes to war
when not one American life was taken not
one American casualty happen when you
had one bullet through one Hall and it
was you provoking the attack but that
was another revelation in the Pentagon
Papers that Johnson although he ran as
the peace candidate and he tried the
caricature Goldwater as the unrepentant
hawk Johnson was actually planning to
enter the war he was planning to break
with Kennedy's policies all right that
was also first exposed in the Pentagon
Papers so that's when you talk about the
Pentagon Papers there's that there's
this encyclopedia this massive almost
invaluable for its time okay
multi-volume exposure through top-secret
documents that we're never supposed to
see the day and and that Ellsberg got
possession of all right now so that's
one thing the second thing when you
refer to the Pentagon Papers is the
Supreme Court case this was caused by
algebric and his friend Tony Russo
who decided that they had to copy the
Pentagon Papers and get them to the
public when the study was completed
which i think was at the end of 1968 or
the beginning of 69 two copies there
were 15 copies
two copies went to RAND Corporation
where Ellsberg and Russo worked all
right and Ellsberg of course knew about
them he got permission from I think
Morton Halperin because I think John
McNaughton had passed away at this time
in a car accident and he got permission
from Morton Halperin who used to when he
worked at the Pentagon which Ellsberg
did okay he worked under Halperin and so
Halperin allowed him to read them all
right he'd never allowed him to copy
them all right and but but he knew where
they were and so he smuggled them out
right and he and his friend Rousseau
Anthony Russo Russo had a girlfriend at
that time named Linda Sanae who owned an
advertising business in LA and they had
a copying machine they didn't want to go
to a public copying of course for
obvious reasons and so take night after
night week after week month after month
they copied just said of the pen I think
I think they ended up copying 45 of the
49 volumes all right
and they copied those because see what's
so interesting about Ellsberg is that he
began as a hawk
all right he was a Hawk of the Vietnam
War he had served in the Marines for I
think three years graduated from Harvard
I think he ended up getting a PhD in
economics all right and was working at
RAND Corporation you know and as time
went on and he began to see these
conflicting reports about Vietnam he
volunteered to go over there which he
spent two years in Vietnam and it was
that 2-year experience which showed him
that the war was hopeless that it was a
complete fraud that the
- i gan that we were propping up could
never win the war you know that lives
were being snuffed out you know mostly
on the vietnamese civilian side in a
cause that was simply never going to
have any kind of fruition right there's
all his book I can't recommend enough
his his his 2002 book secrets is a very
good book you know if it's you know
there's about like I said 13 books on
the Pentagon Papers case kids is one of
the very best all right if you want to
learn just about the Supreme Court side
of it James good Dale's book is the best
fighting for the press so once he got
the volumes and copied them he brought
them to Washington and he went to for
politicians hoping that they would read
them into the congressional record
because he thought that would protect
him because you're the Free Speech and
Debate Clause in the Constitution you
cannot be questioned if you're a senator
or congressman about where you got
information that you spoke about on the
floor well for one reason or another and
you can read his book to find out
Fulbright senators Fulbright Mathias and
McGovern all turned him down as did
congressman McCluskey so then he decided
well I don't want to do this but it was
I'm gonna have to and so he went to his
friend Neil Sheehan who we knew from
Vietnam who was reporter for the New
York Times he invited Sheehan
to come up to his place in Cambridge
because by now he had quit his job at
the RAND Corporation and he had gone
eased to work at MIT on a Teaching
Fellowship so he calls his old friend
Neil Sheehan who interestingly was also
turning on the war he had been a hawk
all right and he had now gone through a
metamorphosis in 70 and 71 like David
Halberstam
had done also all right and they now
we're seeing that what they wanted to
happen which was more American
involvement which Kennedy did not want
to do and they have both criticized
Kennedy for not committing combat troops
and more ordnance to the theater
well they got their wish in spades with
Johnson and they saw that was a terrible
mistake so now they're both trying to
atone for what they had done and so by
71 she hadn't now become a dove and he
now was working into New York Times
Al's burger invites him to go up to
Cambridge looks at the paper as he does
this for more than one weekend and then
Ellsberg was leaving for a vacation one
weekend he made a mistake if she and the
key and of course David any curious
journalist what do you think he did
right he copied the papers all right
when when when he wasn't there all right
without him by the way he didn't tell
Ellsberg he had done it no all right so
and he wouldn't return his calls when
Ellsberg tried to call him you know and
he kept it all secret
in fact Ellsberg found out that The
Times had the Pentagon Papers from a
different reporter all right and he
didn't find out that they were gonna
print them until about two days before
they published nice guy that Neal she
you know all right and so what happens
is that once they're in the possession
of the New York Times this is when James
good Dale the general counsel for the x
intercept it sir
he had heard in March that the times had
come into possession to a veritable pile
of classified material and we're talking
now 71 and Nixon's president he suspects
that even though the Pentagon Papers
don't mention Nixon because they stopped
in 68 that Nixon would do something
about this because Nixon and his vice
president Spiro Agnew had declared an
informal war in the media all right now
it was pretty bad what these guys did
all right um you know if you recall
Spiro Agnew in his calling the press
knit earring nabobs you know and
attacking these media empires of the New
York Times and The Washington Post and
you know and and trying to challenge
licenses in for the Washington Post
Newsweek organization in Jacksonville
etc so Goodell had a really good idea
that the Nixon White House was not going
to accept this even though it really
didn't concern them so he started
mapping out of the fence you know in
case they were sued alright so what
happens now is that there's a great
debate inside the New York Times between
the reporting side and the management
and lawyers side all right the reporting
side led by managing editor Abe
Rosenthal wants to publish most of the
executives and their legal counsel say
now Abe Rosenthal threatened to resign
and he said several these reporters are
going to resign also if you don't print
this though
and so Punch Salzburg are the only two
times at that time then decided to go
ahead and publish now leading up to that
I think June 13 71 was a first story
there was top-secret security at the New
York Times because they thought the FBI
was gonna raid the building and they had
actually placed a reporting team in two
different hotels all right because they
were that worried that the FBI was gonna
swoop down and take the classified
documents away and in those secret hotel
rooms there were security guards all
along the highway they that's actually
in the film the post they actually did a
nice job on that showing the top-secret
security that the New York Times had all
right so the first day June 13th 1971
the New York Times the votes of four it
was a four column headline about this
secret archive of how America got into
the Vietnam War and on the first day
Nixon really doesn't do much Charles
Colson tells them look this is all about
Johnson so let them tear each other
apart don't get involved and so he
doesn't well on the second day Henry
Kissinger enters the equation and
Kissinger after studying the whole Nixon
administration for too long
Kissinger knew just what buttons to
press with Nixon to get him going all
right and it was like really after
listening to these secret tapes in the
White House between Nixon and Kissinger
it was like psychologists call of Foley
LeDoux it's when two personalities get
together they create a monster and
that's what happens with Kissinger and
Nixon all right Kissinger says they're
subverting the government
they're making you look like a weakling
etc and these of course are the buttons
that you can press with Nixon all right
so the second guy who caused the
Pentagon Papers go to the Supreme Court
was John Mitchell the Attorney General
Nixon then calls Mitchell and he says
can we stopped him from publishing and
remember Nixon had been a lawyer in
Mitchell's law firm John Mitchell was a
bond lawyer all right he was in no way a
First Amendment attorney okay well he
tells Nixon yes there's a precedent for
it all we have to do is call them
advanced and warn them which was utterly
and completely wrong
James Goodell the general counsel at
times had done some research on this and
he realized that the times had a very
good case because of the prior restraint
doctrine in England which has an
official secrets law you can employ what
they call prior restraint that is you
can stop someone from publishing in
advance all right in the United States
we don't have that all right so when
Mitchell called the times I think he
sent him a telegram requested they
stopped publishing good they'll totally
ignore the request all right so when
they did Mitchell then went to court and
he got a temporary restraining order and
this was the beginning of the ultimate
Supreme Court case which I think would
be decided about two weeks later so when
the New York Times was restrained from
publishing anymore
this is when Ellsberg decides to go to
the Washington Post except the film the
post very much distorts this first of
all Ben Bradley did not have a spy go up
to the New York Times building all right
illegally enter and see a four column
spread machines that in no book I read
did that happen and two of them one of
them was by Bradley the other one was a
biography of Bradley so I'm sure Bradley
had done that he would have wanted every
public to know all right it didn't
happen the guy who influenced annual
Ellsberg to go to the post was a guy
named done Gifford done Gifford had
worked for the Kennedys Bobby and Ted
Kennedy lived up in Cambridge all right
and was a friend of Sheen's
he said why didn't you go to the post
once you go to the post now they stopped
at times in his book secrets
Ellsberg says on my own I would have
never thought of going to the post and
in my review that consortium news I try
and explain this a point which I'll get
into later why he probably felt that way
all right so anyway that is how he
decided to call Ben big dick Ian who he
knew from RAND Corporation who is now
reporter for the post and big dick Ian
drives up to Cambridge all right no I
actually think he flew up he flew up to
Cambridge and meets him in a motel room
and Ellsberg gives him a much shorter
version of the Pentagon Papers
I think the Washington Post version was
forty one hundred pages all right so
they put these in a couple of boxes that
dick Ian puts him on a plane he had to
buy a second seat on the plane
all right flies back and the Washington
Post now has the Pentagon Papers all
right and so
they published for two days and then of
course the White House calls up Bradley
asked them to stop publishing Bradley
refuses and now they get enjoined so now
there's a flurry of hurryings of
hearings which the film really doesn't
do a lot of justice to I think there
were if I remember correctly there were
two hearings in Washington for the post
there are two hearings in New York for
The Times all right and then finally
there was an appeal to the Supreme Court
and both cases were joined now now
another deception in the film is this
that once the Washington Post was
stopped from publishing there's a scene
in the movie where [ __ ] dick Ian has a
grocery bag which we don't see what's
inside brings it over to Bradley's desk
and says the word the effect I always
wanted to be part of rebellion well
Bradley played by Tom Hanks takes it out
of the Grahams office and he starts
taking out all these other papers who
now have stories and the Pentagon Papers
on their front pages I think they were
eventually nineteen newspapers that got
the Pentagon Papers and Bradley's in the
film system look what you cut this is
this was really kind of sick when I saw
this the idea that somehow the Pentagon
Papers got out to Katharine Graham is
ridiculous you know once the court
enjoined them they couldn't do anything
with the Pentagon Papers it was Al's
burg and his group of young students
some young professors up in Cambridge
who now with done
got together and they started sending
out the Pentagon Papers again to all the
other newspapers alright and I think the
film leaves out is that there were two
other newspapers that were that were
enjoined by the Justice Department and
were in court and I think they were the
st. Louis post-dispatch and the Boston
Globe so there were a total of four
newspapers who were sued all right but
they couldn't stop it
because Al's Burak and his volunteer
group who he is chosen to remain secret
all these years but one guy volunteer
historian gar alperovitz recently
volunteered and he admitted he was part
of that group that got them all out
these other publications where it became
kind of hopeless you know to stop it and
then of course he finally did find a
Senator Mike Gravel from Alaska hmm who
will greed to read the Pentagon Papers
into the Congressional Record which is
that's a story in itself because
Gravelle was like not a senior senator
at all he was on this lowly committee I
think the buildings and ground committee
he got the Pentagon Papers realizing
that almost nobody was there from his
committee that night I think he started
like at 7:00 p.m.
and knowing there would be no objections
he started reading them into the record
the word got out he had his staff start
copying things gave him to the press he
almost collapsed for about 11 o'clock at
night and he made a motion to commit the
rest of the Pentagon Papers of the
congressional records there was nobody
there to object it of course passed and
that is how the Pentagon Papers actually
got into the Congressional Record was
Mike Ravel hmm right and and this by the
way that was the night before the
Supreme Court decision so really in
essence what Mike Gravel did was he kind
of made the Supreme Court decision a
little bit superfluous because once the
Pentagon Papers were transcribed
greville tried to find the publisher
which he finally did up in Massachusetts
beacon press all right and they
published what has come to be known as
the Gravelle version of the Pentagon
Papers but the Supreme Court ended up
ruling for publication the New York
Times lawyers were two superb First
Amendment attorneys the late Alexander
Bickel a Yale Law Professor and a guy
named Floyd Abrams who's still alive by
the way of the the giant law firm in New
York Cahill Cahill Gordon who I
interviewed in advance of that review
and David just a wonderful job The
Washington Post didn't like their firm
and they fired them like and it within
the next year all right but Bickle and
Abrams did a very nice job
you know defending the right to publish
without being prior restrained in
America all right and so and that case
has held up very well I would think when
I talked to Abrams he said he I think
it's held up pretty well myself you know
and so that was the other angle that was
the Supreme Court case and the Mike
Gravel case all right that's another
part of the Pentagon Papers the third
part of the Pentagon Papers is the
criminal case which Nixon and Mitchell
tried to prosecute in two locations one
was in Boston and one was in Los Angeles
in Boston because that's where beacon
press was and in Los Angeles because
that's how RAND Corporation was the one
in Boston the criminal action in
Boston's fail
because Nixon and Mitchell tried to
prove a conspiracy between beacon press
Gravelle the circle that was around
Ellsberg and Neil Sheehan it didn't work
because Greville was protected by the
Free Speech and Debate Clause plus a
number of witnesses refused to testify
Mitchell threw one guy in jail he still
wouldn't talk until that one collapsed
the one in LA
indicted Ellsberg and Russo it ended up
that they indicted Ellsberg on 11 counts
of theft and conversion and three counts
for Rousseau a combination of a hundred
and fifteen and thirty five years
respectively so it would have been the
maximum they would have been in jail for
150 years all right a guy named Stanley
Sheinbaum a very famous liberal
philanthropist in LA raised the money
for their defense which cost nine
hundred thousand dollars today that
would be about seven million
there was no way Russo and Ellsberg
could have paid for their defense all
right that trial which you know it's
incredible to me how that trial is
ignored but at that trial and hardly
anybody knows this John Kenneth
Galbraith testified McGeorge Bundy
testified Arthur Schlesinger testified
arthur schlesinger in something that was
just terribly overlooked testified that
if Kennedy had lived there would have
been no Tonkin Gulf there would have
been no insertion of combat troops there
to be in no ruling Thunder Over Vietnam
and that should have been on the front
pages of every newspaper in America at
that time but it wasn't and the only
place I could find it is in a book by
Peter Schrag called test of loyalty it's
the only book I could find on the
Ellsberg trial hmm you know and I
thought that was just incredible because
that was the trial was I think 70 late
73 and JFK didn't come out till 1991 but
Schlesinger was talking about that back
in 1973 so I thought that was pretty
important stuff well what happened was
Nixon and to really understand how bad
of a President Nixon was and how
terrible of a lawyer Mitchell was this
case really shows you because Nixon
conducted five secret meetings on the
prosecution of the Pentagon Papers
that's how bad he wanted to nail Russo
and Ellsberg you know because he said
that they were comporting with the enemy
yeah this is so ridiculous like the
North Vietnamese did not know that the
Gulf of Tonkin incident was bogus right
they did not know that Johnson was gonna
escalate the war General gap before he
died was interviewed by a friend of mine
manny kang through his son and he said
yes we knew kennedy was a drawing
at the time whose assassination we
understood that and we also understood
that once the Gulf of Tonkin happened
that Johnson was gonna escalate the war
so the idea that that is so so
ridiculous you know that you were aiding
yet what you were doing was telling you
the truth the American people for once
on a war that should never have happened
but thanks to Nixon and the Dulles
brothers in Eisenhower it did you know
so so Nixon conducted five secret
meetings on the prosecution of Ellsberg
and Russo and what happened was that
three things occurred that caused the
case to be dismissed
number one Ellsberg was illegally
wiretapped number two the administration
Nixon and Mitchell had a meeting with
the trial judge Matt Byrne okay in which
they while the trial was in process and
they offered him the FBI directorship
all right and the third was a third
thing they also oh how could I forget
they burglarized Daniel Ellsberg's
psychiatrists office all right you know
hunt and the Cubans and those and gordon
Liddy and those guys mm-hmm you know
because Nixon wanted to get dirt on
Ellsberg all right and so once those
three things were exposed the case was
dismissed now another important thing
that nobody talks about Rousseau did not
want to dismiss the charges he wanted to
go through to a verdict all right
because he thought they were doing
pretty well
and it turned out that when they
interviewed the jurors they would have
been acquitted the challywood seven to
acquit five to convict and two undecided
hmm so so they would have won the case
anyway all right so that's the third
aspect of the Pentagon Papers is the
criminal trial now see what I described
to you is a very long complex series of
events in which and by the way and that
discriminate out probably two-thirds of
the story you know but what Spielberg
and Hanks do is they take just one
aspect of it the Washington Post aspect
which lasted two weeks like I said the
Pentagon Papers case went on for almost
three years you know so they try and
condense this into the two-week interval
that the times passed off will not pass
off but the responsibility for
publishing went from the times of the
post and they never explained how and
why it happened now let me tell you
something even more shocking
James goodale the general counsel for
the New York Times when he heard the
film was being produced asked to see a
copy the original shooting script he was
absolutely stunned when he saw it
because and that original shooting
script there is no opening 15 minutes
which features Ellsberg and the New York
Times in it so in other words the
original script there was no in New York
Times and there was only one scene with
Ellsberg that's when [ __ ] dick Ian goes
up to Cambridge to get the copy for the
post but copies the Pentagon Papers for
the code post and good Dale went [ __ ]
he said how the hell can you film a pro
on the pentagon papers and never mention
in new york times and make daniel
ellsberg into a bit character so then
they changed it and they added this
prologue which i think is about 12 to 15
minutes which picture is Ellsberg and
Vietnam meeting McNamara and Bob comer
of the Defense Department on the way
back alright going ahead and copying the
Pentagon Papers okay and that opening
sequence takes about 12 and by the way
it's the best part of the movie if you
ask me all right you know and guess what
it would have never been there without
James Goodell yes that's the kind of
film it was going to be now my other
objections which I brought out in my
review and by the way my book is coming
out in a few weeks called
JFK the evidence today and I wrote an
entirely new chapter ending chapter in
which I discuss this whole Pentagon
Papers and the post thing in a much
longer way my reviews about ten pages in
the book it's the concluding chapter and
it's at least twice as long all right
and one of the things that they do in
the film which I think is just so
objectionable is that they manufacture a
scene which comes near the end in which
Kate Graham goes to visit McNamara and
there's two things going on in the scene
which which ends up being a shouting
match Graham is depicted as being
surprised and stunned at what McNamara
did in Vietnam
that's one part of it and the Secretary
of Defense McNamara
Enza seen by truck trying to talk her
out of publishing the papers because
she's fearful what Nixon will do that is
one of the most objectionable scenes in
the whole film why see in my view you
can use dramatic license if the actions
of characters taken the film are
consistent with what the real characters
did in life but it's a violation of
dramatic license when what they do in
the film is completely opposed to what
they did in life first of all there's no
evidence this scene ever happened I read
about 12 books now obviously that would
have been in Kay Graham's book personal
history alright it's not there
hmm right and she devotes all the 12
pages of the Pentagon Papers in her book
which is Floyd Abrams told me that shows
you what how important she thought it
was to her right well first of all
there's no evidence at all that Bob
McNamara ever tried to prevent anybody
from publishing the Pentagon Papers in
fact like I've tried to say on more than
one occasion it was Bob McNamara who
created the Pentagon Papers all right
and wasn't for him they would have never
been created it was him who did that it
was him who kept him from Johnson you
know and according to everybody involved
in the project Bob McNamara never
exercised any editorship over the
Pentagon Papers and in fact Delp Delp
said that when he started the project
McNamara took him to his house opened a
big closet door
and gave him reams and reams and reams
of documents hmm all right and he said
words of the effect let the chips fall
where they may and he told him I'm
afraid that once his story gets out
there there's gonna be a lot of people
saying we never had these documents so
we're gonna get the jump on him all
right so that's just an utterly false
characterization and that's seen in the
film and then the other thing is the
idea that graham was surprised at what
McNamara did in Vietnam oh my god to
show you how bad that is you have to go
back to 1964 when Lyndon Johnson took
the presidency after JFK was
assassinated he knew two things number
one he was gonna break with Kennedy's
policy because as you know anybody
informed individual knows today you know
Kennedy was a drawing from Vietnam at
the time of his assassination in Sam 263
all right which was slowly over time in
about the space of about three months
it was completely neutralized because
Johnson decided that Kennedy really
didn't know what he was doing he did and
so he was gonna go ahead and escalate
the war all right but he knew that he
would have to have the Washington Post a
local newspaper on his side because at
that time the Washington Post was the
number one circulation newspaper in the
Capitol and it was registered by about
everybody in Capitol Hill all right he
had Katherine Graham and the executive
staff of the paper over to his house and
then I think was April of 1964 he
revealed to them his plans to S
callate the war in Vietnam now during
the presidential campaign that year if
you recall Johnson completely disguised
what he was gonna do and he tried to
paint Goldwater as the hawk and he said
things like I will not send American
boys to Asia to do what Asian boys
should do and we seek no wider war well
this is a bunch of baloney
all right and Graham had to know that
but then when he started escalating the
war in 65 he sent her to Vietnam to
visit journalist Moreland so he had made
the commander-in-chief of all forces in
Indochina so she got the whole tour and
she came back exhilarated a meeting of
our editorial board said does anybody
think we should bring up the idea of
withdrawal
one guy raised his hand she said you're
so stupid
hmm all right so and I go on and on with
this okay because there was also the
fact that the Washington Post when
Johnson got through the Tonkin Gulf
Resolution the Washington Post not only
backed the resolution they criticized it
only two senators who voted against it
the post even attacked Martin Luther
King when he came out against the war in
1967 all right they said he had
forfeited his moral authority on the
civil rights movement by going against
the president you know and then Ben
Bradley did something extraordinary
right before the Tet Offensive he took
his lead reporter a guy named Ward just
out of South Vietnam brought in a guy
named Peter brace rip and brace trip
ended up
endorsing Johnson's view that's had
offensive which that it was a terrible
failure for Hanoi and a great victory
for the United States which is pretty
crazy I think by anybody's estimate
alright and so that's how much the
Washington Post was in Johnson's pocket
through those crazy escalations you know
from 1965 all the way up to 1968 so the
idea that Graham was oh I'm sort of like
that scene in Casablanca where Claude
Rains comes in and says I'm shocked I'm
shocked that there's gambling in this
hotel you know so I'm sorry that's just
a piece of fiction all right that they
made up you know and like I said for
those reasons that it's the opposite of
what each character would have done or
said it's not at all justified hmm all
right so I was very disappointed in the
film now let me say this in there yeah
it is well done all right Spielberg has
usually been a good visual director you
know and Kate Graham played by Meryl
Streep she's a very capable actress all
right but that does not make up for what
I believe is a falsification of history
you know it's in in very many ways I the
heroes and the heroines of the Pentagon
Papers case were not Ben Bradley they
were not Kate Graham all right that was
an accident
you know something totally unforeseen
you know the heroes of the case were of
course Ellsberg and Russo Linda Sanae
for letting them copy the documents you
know and also Mike Gravel the senator
who read them into the Congressional
Record was also judge gearheart gazelle
who in the lower decision sided with the
Washington Post twice not once but twice
you know it was those
well those people are the heroes you
know of the Pentagon Papers case you
know so I guess I'm very very
disappointed in the film scene and so in
my opinion the only way to tell this
story if you were really a serious
historian which Spielberg and Hanks
think they are but they're really not
you know the only way to tell this story
I would think is through a four night
miniseries you know two hours a night
for an expanse of eight hours if you
were really serious about telling the
truth you know it's a great great
subject because to give you just one
example and I think 1969 when Ellsberg
was turning from Hawk - dove may be 68
uh he went to a talk that Kissinger did
and I think Rutgers University he was in
the audience and when Kissinger was done
now imagine this scene if you could just
let your visual imagine dramatic
imagination let go for a while here is
this National Security Advisor who
everybody thinks is so smart and such a
great maestro foreign policy and here
comes Ellsberg his former student who
raises hand stands up and asked his guy
how many civilians you and Nixon plan on
killing in Indochina this year can you
imagine that scene mmm alright and what
I would have done if I was directing
that scene I would show Kissinger then I
would do a transition flashback as he's
fidgeting at his podium which Ellsberg
said he was you know and to the White
House and I would show Nixon on one side
kissing
on the other side of the Oval Office and
Nixon saying and by the way this is
absolutely true it happened
he said that's different to me and you
Henry I don't care how many civilians we
kill and Kissinger said something like
mr. president I don't like you looking
like a butcher and I would flash back to
that saying because that's the kind of
guy President Nixon was you know the
full story about just had a horrible
president he was has not come out yet
because there's still some of those
tapes that are missing but this is the
reason he fought so hard it was scenes
like that that he fought so hard during
his lifetime to keep those tapes bottled
up all right and so then I would come
back to the present and have camera on
Ellsberg waiting for his reply and
finally the moderator bailed out
Kissinger but that's the kind of movie
you could have if you really stayed true
to the people involved and also the
record but see you know as I said at the
conclusion of that review I said you
know in my opinion that's too hard edged
of a film for Hanks and Spielberg it
cuts too much of the quick about modern
American history you know see when when
Spielberg did Amistad you know that was
that took place like in the early 1800s
okay this is relatively recent history
you know right and and by the way one
last thing I want to point out the film
implies at the end that it was the
Pentagon Papers case that went ahead and
caused Watergate and that's what a lot
of people thought they thought that the
the plumbers unit with hunt and Liddy
and McCord was created to stop the leaks
in the Pentagon Papers case and to go
ahead and do the raid on Ellsberg's
psychiatrists office it turns out that
through the work of Bob Perry and Ken
Hue's that's not the case that the
plumbers unit was created because Nixon
was so worried about what he did to rig
the 1968 election and I'm sure you know
what I'm talking about right with Anna
Chennault okay and blow dam who was the
South Vietnamese ambassador and how
Johnson was trying to get peace talks
going throughout the summer and fall of
1968 all right and Nixon knew about this
and he obstructed got in contact with
President to in Saigon told him not to
agree to any meetings to deprive Johnson
of making that announcement during the
campaign to hurt Humphrey who was Nixon
was running against and then I think
three days before the election to made a
speech in Saigon that was carried by all
three networks NBC CBS and ABC and
you're probably old enough to understand
back then that was it you didn't have
this proliferation of all these cable
networks and Fox News etc you know so if
you got those three networks you got
almost everybody who's watching
television at the time all right and he
made a speech in which he said he would
not participate in any peace talks and
he tried to say that somehow that
Johnson was sandbagging him and his
cause and that really decided the
election Humphrey was gaining on Nixon
and that put the kibosh on it
well Johnson suspected that that's what
Nixon had done so he put the FBI and the
CIA on the trail and they came up with
proof that that was the case and Hoover
told Nixon about that when Nixon was in
his transition period and Nixon was
very worried that that file would be
exposed he actually put a young staff
aide Thomas Charles Houston on the trail
of finding that file and he thought it
was at the Brookings Institute which it
was not but that's when I'm on the tape
Nixon says then we have to firebomb the
Brookings Institute create some kind of
diversion break in there that's how the
plumbers unit began or again that will
probably to hard-edged you know for
because it says that Nixon's not only
violated the law the Logan Act which
prohibits private citizens from
interfering and diplomacy but also stole
the election you know so that's another
thing that I think is false about the
film well it sounds like a very you
called it the end of your view a
combination Washington Hollywood fairy
tale I've heard you talk about a chapter
in one of your books a boy you talk a
lot about kind of the CIA's interaction
in Hollywood do you think that this film
was produced just to make a good story
or do you think there's something more
about trying to raise the profile of the
media why was Tom Hanks involved knowing
knowing the way he looks at the things
like the JFK assassination do you think
okay I guess we should explain to the
listener ship I have written in the past
about 20 pages on the CIA in Hollywood
it's a very important subject and I
talked about Charlie Wilson's War in
that regard all right which was another
very bad movie by Tom Hanks which
completely distorted the whole United
States
Afghanistan Taliban struggle all right
and in that instance he did have a CI
consultant alright on that film now on
this one I haven't been able to find any
evidence of that
alright hangsen spielberg there so
politically naive that somehow they say
they did this movie because they wanted
to try and revive the concept of a free
press against Trump's war on the fake
news thing as if the two situations are
somehow anywhere comparable or parallel
you know I I don't see how things like
stormy Daniels alright and Russia gate I
don't see how any of that parallels
going into a third world country using a
false event as a declaration of war and
then going ahead and laying waste to
that country for a period of around ten
years and taking the lives of at least
four million people and in Cambodia
another million or two I I don't
understand how that equates to each
other you know it doesn't you know it
doesn't at all to me you know and in in
the reissue of my book I'm also going to
point this out that if that was the case
then where were Spielberg and Hanks when
Barack Obama was doing more to violate
freedom of press than any other
president in history you know good Dale
told me that he's been watching this you
know and he said you know Obama was the
worst present
worse than george w bush on this issue
so you know I just don't see I mean
that's another way to me of showing how
politically naive they are and they're
they're very bad understanding you know
of modern history you know the it's it's
really kind of sad you know the the you
know what what these guys are up to you
know and and and their record in that
you know I'm very disappointed you know
I told good day like oh who do these
people get to do their research for them
you know because remember in the first
drafts of the script it wasn't for good
ale there would never even be that long
thing about Ellsberg in Vietnam or the
New York Times at all you know so that's
that's what you're up against with these
guys they think that they're doing a
good thing I don't agree with that at
all
you know I mean Tom Hanks just take a
look first year was parkland you know
then there was Charlie Wilson's War now
there's this movie I mean what kind of a
record is that you know ya know Charlie
Wilson's War was one of the worst movies
and just one of the strangest movies
I've ever seen so I don't see how Tom
Hanks has become such a cultural icon
but you know I think of all the valuable
things you do on your website and in
your writing taking these reviews of
books and movies and especially movies
like this that are just kind of meant to
paint a a completely false picture of
our recent history your reviews of them
are one of the most valuable things you
do of all the valuable things you do on
your site so I think this was this was
really interesting and sets the story
straight you know I think this is a good
good thing to do well thank you so much
David yeah no thank you and yeah I look
forward to talking
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you